# Introduction and summary of problem:
This analysis asked me to forecast annual U.S. rent growth year over year for 2025 to 2028 given a data set. One interesting point of note is that all of the forecasts for the independent variables were provided which, albeit raised suspicion, helped confirm hypotheses found in this analysis. More details and visualizations exist in my jupyter notebook. This code is not "pythonized" for non-technical users

# Methodology Explained
My model selection methodology, especially for investment decisions, is always leaning more towards interpretability over predictability prowess as the goal is to understand the driving factors for an investment decision. I start with a robust Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) whereby I distinguish Rent prices as the dependent variable. Due to the right-skewness of the Rent variable, I applied a log-transform. Logging compresses the high-rent values, which reduces the influence of large outliers possibly from bigger regions. The variables which correlate most with rent prices are ret_us, emp_us, emp.const_us, emp.const_mkt (Macroeconomic Variables). This seems to suggest that regardless of local supply and demand in a particular area, Rent prices move with macro trends a lot more i.e. we can give importance to a panel based pooled OLS over a panel regression model with fixed effects (as a baseline). The latter would capture more of the metro by metro nuances. However the explanatory factor from this data set is captured well enough by the pooled OLS to go further.
The macro-level data and the local employment data experience, as expected, experience high levels of multicollinearity. Thus, a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was applied to address multicollinearity among highly correlated macroeconomic and employment variables, which can distort coefficient estimates and R^2 values in regression models. By transforming the original variables into orthogonal principal components, I preserved the core variance in the data while ensuring stable and unbiased estimation. What we see from visualizing the rent time series is that there needs to be a component that captures the lagged effects of a macroeconomic shock. In 2008, during the financial crises, rent prices on average flatten out, but never really fell until 2011, bottoming out around 2011 Q4. Additionally, during the Covid crises, it again stalled (albeit for a lesser time), but continued to climb upward. So there needs to be a variable to capture this effect. I explored ways to best capture this impact.

# Results Discussed
Thus, our cleanest, most robust model is the pooled OLS with two lagged macro-PCs (local employment is unlagged) as there are no multicollinearity issues. Our R^2 value is 0.387 which says that approximately 39% of the variability in rent prices can be explained by the independent variables in our pooled regression model. This is not a high R^2 value but it helps set a baseline with high interpretability. We can interpret some of the coefficients now. macro_PC1_lag1 has a positive coefficient implying that better macroeconomic factors through the country leads to higher rent. macro_PC2_lag1 has a negative coefficient which implies a sort of macro-drag, lowering rent prices. This could mean when construction or manufacturing in the country weakens, rent prices go down. Our Local_emp_component is positive meaning local job growth implies higher rent. Newer completions put downward rent pressure. Absorption is negative,albeit small. implying oversupply of rental units leading to a negative impact on price. Higher availability has the largest negative effect on rent price. Finally, the stk variable is negative, implying higher total stock in any metropolitan area means lower rents. I imagine this as having lots of competing units and higher supply than demand pushing rent prices lower.
We do see the 2020–2022 surge (especially 2021 & 2022) which aligns with known post-COVID rent spikes. Then we see the dip (-6.0%) in 2025 — which could reflect supply glut/surplus which we also saw in the West Palm Beach (negative dip), Allentown (negative dip) and ChicagoInner (positive swing) cases. Finally, for the 2026 to 2028 years, in the US, on average we see steady normalization in the 2–3% range, indicating modest rent increases which have strong indications as to the impact of local real estate factors.
While this analysis may not have captured every non-linearity and auto-regressive dependencies, the use of PCA allowed the pooled model to cut through the noise of multicollinearity and capture the core drivers of rent growth, making city-level fixed effects moot but not meaningless.
According to an article by the National Mortgage Professional (linked in code), single-family rental (which are the second largest rental block) rates grew by about 0.8%. So, without knowing exactly what kind of properties this dataset is referring to, it's hard to have a definitive sense but intuitively it seems as though this analysis captured trends well and forecasted within a forgivable range.
Finally, for the 2026 to 2028 years, speaking at a national average level, we see steady normalization in the 2–3% range, indicating modest rent increase which implies a forecasted steadiness, on average in the continental United States.
Given the limitations of the dataset, this analysis still helps investment committee decision makers. Rent prices in a local area are affected by many factors, more than the 12 presented here.
A fixed effects method will obviously have a higher R^2 value (It did, I have not included this in the analysis) but the fact remains that this model provides enough precision power and a high level of interpretability.

# Appendix:
# Model Improvements:
For future analysis, I would like to build a model that captures all unobserved, time-invariant factors associated within each micro-metro. I believe Rent prices could depend on location to things regardless of region: transportation, restaurants, bars, etc. This has more to do with the data at hand more than model selection and priorities. Macroeconomically, there needs to be much more data on the effect of interest rates on renters, and owners.
